7.14 REPORTING ASSAULT / ABUSE 
  SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY  
 Effective: 03/01/15
 Supersedes 01/07/13 
 Page 
1 
of 
2 
INDICATION
 Suspected assault or Abuse
  PROCEDURE
 1. Follow appropriate treatment protocol for patient™s chief complaint, e.g. head trauma.
 2. If concerned about patient safety, transport to an appropriate Receiving Hospital.  

Notify receiving hospital staff of y
our concerns.
 3. Contact appropriate law enforcement agency (see below).
 4. Provide emotional support to the victim and family.
 5. When in doubt, transport suspected abuse/neglect victims to a Receiving Hospital. 
 6. Treat all clothing, medications and personal items 
with patient at time of transport as 
potential evidence. If these need to be removed from patient to facilitate 

assessment/treatment, place them in a container labeled with patient identification and 

document turnover of these materials to patient treatmen
t team or law enforcement. 
 7. The patient care report should be descriptive as possible of the conditions of the 

elder/dependent adult and of his/her living situation.
  
 REPORTING PROCEDURES (SUSPECTED OR ACTUAL INCIDENT)
  Contact the appropriate agency by telephone as soon as possible to give a verbal report and 

receive instructions on how to file a written report (generally must be done within
 36-hours
).  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE: 
  Notify local law enforcement or Receiving Hospital staff and document.
  CHILD ABUSE
:  Must transport pediatric patients who are potential child abuse victims. 
  San Francisco Human Services Agency 
- 
Child Abuse Hotline (800) 856
-5553 (available 
24-hrs)
  ELDER ABUSE (age 65 or older):
 If the any combination of the following circumstances are present, contact 
San Francisco Police 

Department
 immediately to respond to the scene from where the elder/dependent adult was 
removed by paramedics, regardless of whether it was at home or at an acute care or long term 

care facility.
  Evidence of either (
a) 
decubitis ulcer on the elder/dependent adult, or (b) injuries on the 
elder/dependent adult that are consistent with falls or an assault, i.e., possible fractures, 

lacerations, bruises, or signs of inappropriate physical restraint.
  Evidence of poor hygiene or living conditions for the elder/dependent adult (i.e., 

feces/urine soaked bedsheets or clothing, evidence of dehydration or malnutrition, 

extreme clutter or filth in the home, extremely bad odors, evidence of human waste that 
has not been properly disposed of, such as dirty adult diapers, or waste being kept in 
buckets or by other inappropriate means
). 7.14 REPORTING ASSAULT / ABUSE 
  SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY  
 Effective: 03/01/15
 Supersedes 01/07/13 
 Page 
2 
of 
2 
 Identifiable caretaker(s) for the elder/dependent adult, whether or not present at the 
scene at the time of the paramedics responding.
  The report by t
he paramedic should be descriptive as possible of the conditions of the 

elder/dependent adult, and of his/her living situation, including any odors, and the extent of 

poor hygiene or filth in the residence or facility.
  ELDER ABUSE AT A LICENSED HEALTH CAR
E FACILITY BY FACILITY STAFF:
 California Department of Health 
Services
 Division of Licensing and Certification
 350 90th Street
 Daly City, CA  94105
 (650) 301
-9971 / (800) 554
-0353
    OR Ombudsman
 (for Skilled Nursing Facility Complaints)
 6221 Geary Bouleva
rd San Francisco, CA  94121
 (415) 751
-9788
  ELDER ABUSE AT HOME OR ABUSE BY A VISITOR OR ANOTHER RESIDENT AT A LICENSED 
HEALTH CARE FACILITY
:  San Francisco Human Services Agency 
Œ 
Adult Protective Services,
  Adult Abuse Hotline (415) 355
-6700 (24
-hour numb
er)
  DEPENDANT ADULT AT HOME OR ABUSE BY A VISITOR OR ANOTHER RESIDENT AT A 
LICENSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY
:  San Francisco Human Services Agency 
Œ 
Adult Protective Services,
  Adult Abuse Hotline (415) 355
-6700 (available 24
-hrs)
  SEXUAL ASSAULT:
  Patients shou
ld be encouraged to be transported to San Francisco General Hospital 

emergency department for evidence collection 
if the assault occurred less than 72
-hours 
prior to ambulance call.
  
 Discourage bathing, washing, urination/defecation or changing clothes unt
il arrival at 
the hospital in order to preserve evidence.
  HUMAN TRAFFICKING*: 
  SFPD
's Vice Crimes tip line (415) 643
-6233 for suspected human trafficking. 
  San Francisco Collaborative against Human Trafficking (www.sfcaht.org) lists other local 

resources 
or call the
 National Human Trafficking Resource Center (888) 373
-7888. 
  *Definition: 
"Human trafficking is when people are treated as possessions
 (such as being forced 
into prostitution or involuntary labor). Warning signs include individuals who
 are segr
egated 
from contact with the responders, are
 physically or emotionally bullied by others,
 or who don't 
have control of their own 
 ID/documents;
  locations with unsuitable living conditions or 
unreasonable security measures;
 or incidents where responders are approached and asked for 
protection/asylum from other individuals at a scene.ﬂ
  